Could you please introduce yourself and describe
your current occupation? My name is John Dixon,
Lieutenant Colonel, United States Army. I'm an
intelligence officer with 21 years in the
service. Could you describe the early part of your
military career and how did you become interested
in the field of military intelligence? I was first
commissioned in the infantry.
was not very pleased with the duty in the infantry.
It wasn't what I considered to be a challenge
mentally. It was very boring, I thought. And I had
extensive contact in my first assignment in
Berlin with intelligence officers, neighbors,
friends, and people that I dealt with on the staff
in Berlin Brigade. And after, I guess, two and a
half years, I became convinced that I wanted to
transfer to intelligence. I did that in 1967 and
then went for training at Fort Holabird,
Maryland, where I became an aerial surveillance
officer. When were you stationed in Vietnam? I
arrived in Vietnam January 22, 1968, and stayed
there exactly one year, departing in January of
1969. Before you stationed in Vietnam, what type
of special training did you see that prepared you
for your intelligence gathering in the Vietnam
theater? When I arrived in Fort Holabird,
Maryland in June of 1967, I went through a short
course called the Intelligence Officers
Orientation Course, which was designed to teach
young officers the basics of tactical and combat
intelligence. This included things like
collection management, analysis, the various
disciplines of intelligence. It really was very
simply a vocabulary and a set of concepts that gave
an officer an orientation. It was tailored. At
this time, they had already started tailoring the
course for Vietnam so that a lot of the stuff that we
learned was designed to be used in Vietnam. I then
attended a six-month-long course designed to
train aerial surveillance operators. These
officers basically are photo intelligence
officers. This course taught the basics of
photography from an aerial viewpoint, the
various kinds of imagery and collection to
include infrared, airborne radar, side-looking
airborne radar. And it taught how these
collectors could be exploited to find the enemy,
identify the enemy, identify his activity. We
learned how to identify enemy equipment from
aerial photography. We learned how to plan aerial
photography missions, how to debrief the flying
crews, and how to produce the intelligence
product that came from it. This course was not yet
completely adapted to Vietnam.
Most of the collectors that we had, the sensors
that we had in aerial surveillance at the time were
oriented more towards conventional warfare and
the course had not yet caught up with the sudden
change in technology that was going on at that time
in Vietnam. So it really wasn't aimed at
collection in Vietnam, although we may have spent
a week or so on its application. It wasn't very
applicable to Vietnam. What type of duties did you
perform while stationed in Vietnam? When I first
reported to Vietnam, because I had been an
operations officer in the infantry, even though I
was newly trained in intelligence, I was
appointed assistant operations officer the
first Military Intelligence Battalion Aerial
Reconnaissance and Surveillance. This
battalion was headquartered in Saigon, although
it had detachments throughout Vietnam, from as
far north as Da Nang down to the Delta in Can Tho,
which is on the Mekong River. The mission of the
MIBARS, as the unit was called, was to provide
aerial reconnaissance support to the field army
by providing liaison photographic products and
intelligence reporting in conjunction with the
Air Force who flew the majority of the aerial
reconnaissance missions that we supported.
What type of tasks did you perform while working in
your second job? My second job was as intelligence
officer or S2 of an infantry battalion. in the 1st
Infantry Division. This was 2nd Battalion, 28th
Infantry. The intelligence officer for an
infantry battalion doesn't do very
sophisticated intelligence work. The job there
is to keep the commander informed as to the enemy
activity in his area and in the areas adjacent to
him, provide information to the commander on the
terrain, on the weather, on known or suspected
locations of enemy units, and to support
operations and operations planning so that the
commander can effectively use his troops. My job
included coordination with higher headquarters
to find out what intelligence picture they had, to
try to find where they thought the enemy was, and
this required constant flying back and forth to
the headquarters. I did a lot of reconnaissance on
my own, briefed patrols, debriefed the patrols,
helped interrogate prisoners, flew scout
missions myself, where we would hang out of the
helicopter and try to find enemy tracks, enemy
footprints in the mud, and that sort of thing, just
in an effort to try to locate the enemy. You arrived
in Vietnam right before the Tet Offensive. Did the
military intelligence apparatus predict a New
Year's Offensive by the Viet Cong and NVA? If they
had predicted the Viet Cong attack during Tet of
68, they didn't tell us about it because we had
absolutely no forewarning. The first thing that I
recall knowing about the Tet Offensive was waking
up the morning of the attack to gunfire. And we were
right in the midst of the NVA and Viet Cong
regiments that had infiltrated into Saigon. If
anyone knew about it, they gave us no warning. Now,
I am told that units in the field that were closer to
the intelligence picture out in the countryside
saw something happening. But whether or not they
called it or not is the question. And I don't
believe most of them called an attack at that time.
They felt something was happening, but none of
them saw the magnitude or the significance of the
attack. and the fact that the enemy would be able to
get entire units into Saigon and conduct an attack
that threatened the entire government and MacVie
headquarters, Tan Son Nhat Air Base, and an attack
that would really threaten and would involve just
about everyone in Vietnam. Almost every unit was
involved in the Tet Offensive in Vietnam. And I
don't think anyone saw that coming. You're saying
that there was some hint in the tactical military
intelligence in the field that there was going to
be an offensive but other operatives like the cia
and other military intelligence gatherers were
pretty much ignorant of the attack i don't think if
anyone did know about it they they sure didn't pass
the word around the uh i i had friends who were
located at two field force headquarters and up in
the first field force headquarters in the hill
country in the mountains and have talked to them
since and i have found very, very few people who
said they saw it coming. Some folks in signals
intelligence have said that they felt perhaps it
was coming, and they had some indications.
Everyone had indications that units were moving
and that something was afoot, but I don't think
anybody realized exactly what was happening or
realized the magnitude of the attack that was
coming. In other words, I think they were caught by
surprise. How did U.S. intelligence personnel
overcome the initial unfamiliarity with the
local environment and inexperience with the
enemy? Not very well. One
thing you've got to remember is that everybody
there was there for one year, usually. Now and then
people would extend for more. And you just don't
build up intelligence, experience, expertise,
knowledge of the environment in that short period
of time. The change in culture, the change in
physical environment, the unusual physical
environment, the fact that the enemy was at home
and we were not, just handicapped our
intelligence collection immensely.
And as a result, we tended to rely more on technical
collection devices, technology, rather than
classical intelligence collection. We just
didn't have our grasp or have our finger on the
human aspect of intelligence in Vietnam. We
didn't understand the Vietnamese and the way the
Vietnamese thought. We didn't understand the
Orientals in general. They were able to sell us a
bill of goods quite frequently. For example, it
was not uncommon for an agent, a Vietnamese or a
Chinese agent in the Delta, for example, to be
selling intelligence reports to five different
intelligence collection agencies, sell the same
report. We had no collection management, no
source control, so that he could get away with
that. And he could also manipulate us just to make
money. After the Tet Offensive, the big issue was
when would the next offensive come? And you could
see very clear patterns when these intelligence
entrepreneurs, these businessmen, would make
money selling reports of the next Tet Offensive,
because they would flow, you'd start to see the
reports, April of 68 is going to be the big attack,
and nothing happened in April of 68. And it was very
clear that somebody was selling us a bill of goods.
These multiple sources, the inability of the
Americans to handle Vietnamese and Chinese
agents effectively caused the human aspect of
intelligence to mislead us. The technical
collection, aerial surveillance, signal
surveillance, they could never be exactly
perfect. There's always going to be some
ambiguity with them. And so you had no way to
corroborate what you got from your sensors with a
good human intelligence report. And combine that
with the fact that the enemy was just very security
conscious. It made it difficult. Are you
suggesting that the intelligence officers and
personnel should maybe have stayed in Vietnam and
been for longer than a year? Any intelligence
operation, in order for it to be effective, the
operatives have to be there a long, long time. Now,
there were some there. The CIA had people there for
a long, long time. And the Green Berets would have
people that would volunteer for a long time. But
you're right. The one-year tour hurt us to that
extent. It hurt us in other areas. It hurt us in
combat effectiveness and other things. But it
definitely hurt us in intelligence. It takes you
six months to learn your area, maybe two or three
months of effective work, and then you were
getting short, and by then it was time to leave.
Could you describe some of the high-tech devices
you used to detect the enemy? Well, when I first got
there, we had a package of reconnaissance sensors
that were pretty standard.
Aerial photography had become very
sophisticated. You had some high-speed cameras
and panoramic cameras and nose angle cameras in
the aircraft that would give you extremely high
and very, very good resolution. Their biggest
problem was the fact that they wouldn't penetrate
the jungle. And so we'd take miles and miles of film
and have nice pictures of jungle and very high
resolution, high quality imagery that wouldn't
show us very much. We had just introduced
infrared, airborne infrared, into the
collection package. And this is mounted on on
either a small aircraft owned by the Army called a
Mohawk, or it was mounted in a RF-101 owned by the
Air Force, the Mohawk would find campfires with
this infrared. And that proved very effective in
the early days because the Viet Cong at night would
stop to rest, or during the day even, would stop to
rest and cook their rice and cook their soup. And
when they didn't realize what was going on, when
they first introduced the sensor to Vietnam, it
was extremely effective because one mission
could reveal an entire bivouac area for North
Vietnamese regiment or Viet Cong regiment. And
very quickly, the American forces realized how
they could and developed a system to capitalize on
this intelligence by tying the reports in from the
infrared with the artillery and bombing
planners, and we made good use of this
reconnaissance. But it didn't take long for the
Viet Cong to realize that every time they lit a
campfire, artillery would come in on them. And so
they started using all sorts of techniques to
avoid the infrared. For example, they would build
a cover for a campfire that would diffuse the heat.
And what it would do would make it so that it wasn't
nearly as great a heat source. Or they would always
build their campfires under deep jungle instead
of building them where there was any chance the
heat might radiate out through the jungle. And as a
result of this, after a while, it became more and
more difficult to find the enemy using infrared.
Side-looking airborne radar was introduced in
the country. It was originally designed to find
tanks and armored personnel carriers and trucks.
It had a limitation. in that it could find moving
targets if they were going a minimum speed or had a
minimum size. But invariably, we were looking at
individual soldiers running down a trail, and
they were neither large enough nor fast enough to
show up on side-looking airborne radar. And so
SLAR, as it was called, was used mainly along the
borders looking into Cambodia and Laos and trying
to find the Ho Chi Minh Trail and to try to peg where
the big supply trucks were moving, who apparently
moved in large numbers with relative freedom over
there along the trail. And it was tough to find the
Ho Chi Minh Trail without slar. As long as you
didn't have real thick canopy, slar could
penetrate. But about
halfway through my tour, the Army and everyone
started introducing what are called seismic
intrusion devices. And these are gadgets. to feel
the vibration of the earth as a soldier walks by or
as a truck comes by. And it would radio that sensing
back to a central location. And we had these
seismic intrusion devices introduced into our
area of operation in June or July of 1968. And it
proved very, very effective because the
Vietnamese didn't know they were there. They
thought they were relatively free to run up and
down the trail. And what it would do was tell us that
there is movement on a trail segment between point
so-and-so and point so-and-so. And it allowed us
to establish a pattern of enemy movement. And it
allowed us to determine where ambushes would be
effective and where artillery fire would be
effective.
Did these technological devices replace the loss
in human intelligence factors, did they at all
compensate for the loss of human? I think they
certainly made things a little bit better because
without them it would have been a disaster. The
human intelligence collection was so
ineffective. At least it appeared to be from our
point of view. But I can tell you that at the
tactical level, at the infantry battalion level,
they were very effective for us because they
really determined where we were going to operate,
and it was simple little things. They protected us
in many cases. In June of 1968, they introduced
these seismic intrusion devices to be used even by
ambush patrols. What would amount to it, an ambush
would set up, and they could put these devices one
up and down the trail on either side, and one out to
the front and one to the rear, and the platoon
leader, the lieutenant, or the sergeant there
could tell if the enemy was coming 15 minutes
before the enemy got there. And that was providing
him with warning that we never got before. And it
caused the enemy to be ambushed very effectively
in a lot of cases, and it protected our patrols from
counter-ambush where the enemy might figure out
that our guys were there. Our guys would know about
it beforehand. Another technical device that I
failed to mention that was introduced at this time
and about this time was the night observation
device. This is a device that enhances the
existing light, no matter how dim it might be, so
that you could see the enemy in almost pitch dark.
And before the introduction of this device, the
night belonged to the enemy. There was no doubt
about it. Our guys could never develop the night
vision that was needed. The Viet Cong would live in
the dark. North Vietnamese live in the dark for a
year, trying to infiltrate down. And so we could
never win the night until the night observation
device was introduced. And these involved They
looked anything from a small scope that went on a
rifle for sniper purposes up to a huge device about
the size of a trombone or even larger that could be
mounted on a tower and could collect light out two
or three miles. And this virtually took the night
away from the enemy and gave us the ability to see
movement out around our defensive positions for a
mile or two in any direction so long as the
observation was clear The enemy could not
surprise you with the night observation device.
And there were many cases where snipers, when they
were first introduced, snipers could use these
night observation devices with a silencer on
their rifle to pick off the enemy, and the enemy
wouldn't even know what was hitting them. And the
sniper would report the other enemy who were not
shot with the first round would wonder what had
happened. They were running around confused
because it couldn't tell where the shot was coming
from, and they couldn't imagine how anyone could
see them to shoot them. Did the defoliation
efforts of the ranch hands aid you in your effort as
an aerial reconnaissance officer, or did it
simply drive the enemy from the defoliated areas?
I think it probably drove them from the defoliated
area, but you've got to admit that that in itself
aided us in our effort to find the enemy, because
what it did was it took that part of the ground away
from the enemy. There were only a few large areas in
our area of operation that had been totally
defoliated. By the time I was out in the field with
the infantry battalion, much of the ground had
already been plowed down with what were called
Rome plows. This is where you would take huge
caterpillar tractors with chains in between them
and just plow the jungle into the ground. And that
was massive defoliation of a non-chemical
nature. We had some defoliation in our area, and I
recall flying over some of the scouting, never
finding any enemy in the area. And yet you could see
evidence that before the defoliation, the area
had been totally infiltrated with bunkers and
trenches and foxholes. I remember flying over a
zigzag trench that had been dug through the jungle
for, oh, I would say two or three miles, just like in
World War I. And I would guess that beforehand, and
the trench was oriented so that troops could walk
down the trench headed straight towards the large
air base at Benoit. And the best I can imagine was
before defoliation under the triple canopy
jungle, you could move a company through that
trench. And unless you put an artillery around
right into the trench, they were safe the whole
way. Well, now with defoliation, the trench was
useless because we knew where it was. so my answer
to that question is yes I think that it was
effective and it helped us in our efforts to find
the enemy but at the same time it did drive them to
those areas that were not defoliated and it made us
made it it helped us in that we knew where the enemy
might be but it we just couldn't find them in the
defoliated area once the area had been stripped
away I think that before going further though I
think I should say the Rome plow was much more
important to us because the Rome plow opened up
entire made the jungle into a prairie. So that at
one point, for example, we had a tower built in our
night defensive position, and I could see 10 miles
in one direction with binoculars, and at night see
5 miles with that night observation device. And no
one could literally, no one could move through
there in large numbers without us catching them
because of the roll cloud. Were you aware of the
Phoenix program while you were stationed in
Vietnam? I was aware of the Phoenix program. I
didn't have a lot of contact with it. And the way I
was aware of it was that at one point I trained a lot
of people who were on the Phoenix program as to how
to use aerial reconnaissance, reconnaissance
products, what reconnaissance could do for them.
My dealings were not very extensive with them.
They were not located in an area. They did not
operate in the areas that I was located in when I was
with the infantry. And as a result, I didn't have
any operational dealings with them per se. I
remember one time bumping into one of the CIA guys
that worked in that business. He had some national
police that came out with us and helped us on a sweep
of the village. But for the most part, I had very
little dealings with them because they weren't
operating in our area of operations. Did you
coordinate your intelligence efforts with other
similar networks? I would coordinate very
closely with the local advisors and with the
local, if there was an ARVIN unit in our area, I
would on occasion go over and visit them. But our
situation was somewhat unique in that we were
working in an area that had been declared a
free-fire zone. And what that meant was that all of
the local civilians, for the most part, had been
relocated out of the area so that we could assume
that anybody in the area was in it. And that was the
basic rule. If you were out there, you were a
target. And for that reason, we didn't have too
many other agencies to coordinate with. It was our
area of operation, just very much like an isolated
little war of its own.
Did you feel that the lack of coordination with
ARVIN or not using ARVIN as interpreters kind of
was a liability to your intelligence gathering? I
think it could have hurt us. It would have helped us
if we could have, for example, had an infantry
company of all ARVN with us in the infantry
battalion that we were in. But that didn't happen.
We did have ARVN soldiers to serve as our
interpreters within the infantry battalion. I
had three interpreters that were assigned to me
all the time. and they were designed to help us
interrogate prisoners on the spot. You see, when
you capture a prisoner, the most effective
interrogation happens right after the capture.
When the soldier, when the enemy is scared, he
doesn't know what's going to happen, he's still
frightened from the battle and disoriented, and
he hasn't had a chance to talk to any of his leaders
that are also captured. And also, you can get
information from him at that time that can help you
in the immediate fight that you're still in. And so
I had three ARVN interpreters that were with me
that spoke pretty good English. And they were with
us full time. And I would send them out with the
rifle companies in case a capture took place. And
their job was to find out what was going on. And they
would answer to the immediate company commander
that was there. They were somewhat of a problem
because they tended to try to avoid combat. They
didn't want to get shot at. And there were even
times when at least one of them I suspected as being
a BC sympathizer because he tended to disappear
right before the big fights. He would always have
to go back to base camp to check on his finance or his
pay or something just before we got our 9th
defensive position attack and that sort of thing.
I never was able to pin anything on him, but he was a
relatively unreliable sort of character that...
became a liability. One of them was very good, and I
could use him to get out there when we captured
somebody and get immediate information that the
company commander or the battalion commander
could use. But I think ideally
we should have had perhaps ARVN soldiers with us,
particularly if we were operating in an area where
there were civilian population also alongside
us. But In our area of operation, as I said, there
weren't very many civilians. And as a result, I'm
not so sure that we would have used that
capability. What we might could have used is
someone who knew the area better, the terrain,
knew where the creek bottoms were, knew where the
trails were. And that's what we really lacked. We
didn't know the ground very well. And it's just a
complex terrain that could be very confusing. And
the enemy knew it better than us. And as a result,
we're able to use it better. What type of warfare
would you classify the conflict that you were
participating in? Well, at the time that I was the
S2 of 2nd Battalion, 28th Infantry, our battle,
our tactic had to be one that was almost
conventional warfare, in that we were located
northeast of Saigon, about 40, 50 miles out, and
our job was to deny the enemy infiltration into the
capital area so that they could not mass for the
follow-up offensive to the Tet Offensive of 1968.
Generally, I think the authorities, the people in
country that did this sort of thing thought that
the enemy would mount another offensive in May.
They tried to mount a small offensive, but they
really weren't capable, and they thought another
Tet was coming maybe in the fall. And so our mission
was to get out and deny infiltration. And it turned
out that really we were ambushing in company size
almost, not little small ambushes. And we were
trying to find the enemy out at the 40 mile range out
there so that we could engage them before they
could assemble and move south. We were working
against organized units, conventional units,
not small change outfits. There were times when
our ambushes would pop on on 50-man units moving
through the jungle, certainly not classical
guerrilla-type warfare. The units that we fought
against were armed with machine guns, mortars,
anti-tank rocket launchers, and therefore
couldn't be considered to be guerrilla-type
organizations. They had sergeants and captains
and colonels in charge. They had communications.
They were mainline North Vietnamese units or they
were Viet Cong units that were trained along the
same organization line. After serving in
Vietnam, you attended several professional
military schools. How was the topic of Vietnam
treated? Well, in fact, after Vietnam, I returned
to Fort Holabird and for one year attended what's
called the Intelligence Officers Advance
Course.
The course was one of those experiences that you
have now and then where it's just beyond reality
how inapplicable that course was for our
development. It was sort of a hodgepodge, an
effort to try to prepare officers to go to Vietnam,
in case anyone hadn't, although all of us had
already been to Vietnam once. And yet it was an
effort to continue to try to watch for the Soviets
in the European theater. and how to be an
intelligence officer against them. Very, very
few of the experiences in Vietnam were taught in
this officer's advance course. They hadn't been
condensed, consolidated. They had not been put
into doctrine yet. And I don't think anybody was. I
think we were fighting a war at the time, and
therefore didn't have time to sit back and think
about how to do it better. That's unfortunate. We
probably should have.
Eight years later, I went to the Command and
General Staff College in Fort Leavenworth,
Kansas. And there, after that period of time, you
would have thought that someone would have sat
down and thought this out. Vietnam had fallen by
then. This was 1976. And I think that I would have
thought that people would have had plenty of
opportunity to review the subject and to come up
with at least some lessons learned that could be
taught, if not an entire new concept or doctrine
for this sort of warfare. But instead, what I found
was that the Army had turned to the east, to the
European theater, to conventional war against
the Soviets, and was concentrating its efforts on
learning the Soviet warfare techniques and
equipment and organization better, and totally
ignored counter-revolutionary warfare,
counter-guerrilla warfare, low-intensity
warfare, whatever you might want to call it. There
were a couple of electives offered in the subject.
I'm told that they offered very little in new
ideas. We rarely talked about Vietnam unless
someone was telling war stories, and everything
that we were doing and everything that we learned
was oriented towards the towards the European
environment and totally ignored the Vietnamese
experience. That contrasted, however, to the
British Army Staff College. In 1980, I attended
the British Army Staff College and was one of three
Americans there. I found that the Brits
concentrated on this sort of warfare. They called
it counter-revolutionary warfare for almost
one-third of the year-long course. It's a little
wonder because the Brits are still involved in
this sort of situation or conflict in Northern
Ireland and they're spending a lot of effort to it
and perhaps they're doing it right because their
tactics are a little bit more clearly resolved
than ours. They use low-level They seem to use
intelligence better. They don't rely so heavily
on technology as we do, although the technology
has got its part with the British effort. But in
general, it was just somewhat surprising to see
that they spend more effort and more time teaching
their officers how to do this sort of warfare than
we do. Perhaps we'll get back to that someday. But
we haven't done it yet that I know of. and
repeatedly I've asked general officers in our
army when that's going to happen and it doesn't
seem as though it's come back into vogue yet and
won't be until perhaps we have another
environment, another threat to us in that sort of
situation that we're required. Do you think that
the military intelligence community is prepared
for a similar situation, let's say, in Central
America? Are they prepared to assess the level of
conflict and predict the enemy's troop
movements, et cetera? I think we're better off
now. And that sort of contradicts what I said
before. But I'll tell you why. And it's a
simplistic response, maybe, but I think it has
some weight of truth. And that is that the Central
American environment We're more familiar with
it. We have more people that speak that language.
We know better how the people there think. We have a
better assessment of their techniques. We know
the environment there. We know the terrain. We
know the national conditions that exist,
although we don't handle it very smart, at least at
the strategic level, perhaps. I think we're
better prepared for... a similar situation in
Central America. And I think we would do much
better. The Oriental mystique, the failure of
Americans to even understand how an Oriental
thinks was perhaps our fundamental cause of our
downfall in Vietnam. And we just didn't know how to
think in their terms. I think we know how to think
perhaps a little bit better in a Latin American
term. I think we've had more contact with them. We
have, for example, the Army has about 10% of its
people who speak Spanish as their first language.
And that reason alone will help us. That fact alone
helps us a lot. The fact that we've had a greater
presence in Latin America over history and a
greater knowledge of what goes on down there will
help us a lot, I believe. But at the same time, If we
make the same mistakes in Latin America that we
made in Vietnam concerning our assessment of the
so-called enemies, will our assessment of the
enemy's determination or their capability to
conduct extended protracted warfare, if we make
those same mistakes and we go about it in the wrong
way as we did in Vietnam, we're not going to come out
any better. We've got to look at the strategic
situation carefully before we make any
commitments there. And that strategic situation
and decision will then determine how we do things
at the grassroots level.